Blogpost: Provenance in the age of Generative AI (#432)
harvard-lil/website-static: app/_posts/2023-05-22-provenance-in-the-age-of-generative-ai.md

---
title: '"Did ChatGPT really say that?": Provenance in the age of Generative AI.'
author: matteo-cargnelutti
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

> **Prompt**:
> “Write a single sentence summarizing why cryptographically-signed provenance information matters in the context of AI-generated content.”

> **ChatGPT**:
> “Cryptographically-signed provenance information matters in the context of AI-generated content to establish trust, transparency, and authenticity by providing a verifiable record of the content's origin, authorship, and creation process.”

That's a great point, but did ChatGPT really say that, or did I make that up to trick you into reading this article? I could show you a screenshot of that exchange to try to convince you …

<a href="https://lil-blog-media.s3.amazonaws.com/f276b0c4-01.webp">
    <img src="https://lil-blog-media.s3.amazonaws.com/f276b0c4-01.webp" alt="Capture of ChatGPT featuring the above dialogue."/>
</a>

… but what good would it do, when it’s so easy to produce convincing fakes?

> <!-- more -->

Reviewer: Locally, the separator is appearing at the bottom of the post. I can't tell why yet.

Author: Because I typed `<!-- more -->` instead of `<!--more-->` 🤡

Reviewer: Ha I thought I looked at it so carefully

<figure>
    <a href="https://lil-blog-media.s3.amazonaws.com/f276b0c4-03.webp">
        <img src="https://lil-blog-media.s3.amazonaws.com/f276b0c4-03.webp" alt="Edited screenshot of a ChatGPT exchange. Question: Who won the 2020 US presidential election? Answer: We get it, you're trying to make a point about fact checking."/>
    </a>
    <figcaption>(This screenshot has been edited)</figcaption>
</figure>

## Papers, please

Maybe it is because I am an immigrant in the United States, and therefore am used to having to repeatedly prove who I am, _where_ I come from, and _why_ I am here, but I find similarities in the methods government agencies employ to figure out whether I belong here, and the problem at hand.

Every time I travel back to the United States, I need to have my passport with me, which shows _where_ I come from, but also my green card, which shows _why_ I am here. If I were to lose these documents, my biometrics, collected earlier on, could be used to identify me and make an association between myself and my immigration status and history.

> Generative AI is crossing a yet-to-be-defined border between statistics and human creativity, and while this is something we should welcome, we can also ask that it identifies itself when it does so. Cryptographically-signed provenance information, both embedded in a file or archived on the server side could help achieve that goal. After all, why would we make humans jump through so many - and sometimes unjustified - hoops, but simply trust AI output?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generative AI is crossing a yet-to-be-defined border between statistics and human creativity, and while this is something we should welcome, we can also ask that it identify itself when it does so. Cryptographically-signed provenance information, embedded in a file or archived on the server side, could help achieve that goal. After all, why would we make humans jump through so many - and sometimes unjustified - hoops, but simply trust AI output?
```

</figure>

The provenance information contained in the resulting file could answer questions about the authenticity of that content — since it would be signed by OpenAI — but also about the context surrounding its creation: What model was used to generate it? When? What prompt was the model given? Was this what the LLM returned, or did the original response trigger a safeguard mechanism? Did the chatbot interact with external plugins to generate this response? Is this an isolated exchange, or part of a longer discussion? All potentially crucial elements that require careful consideration and policy decisions, as they may preserve and reveal too much about what users submitted. 

Applications integrating APIs such as the one provided by OpenAI would directly benefit from access to this verifiable contextual information. However, they would also have an opportunity to add to it and inform consumers about the transformations they’ve operated: a key component of the C2PA standard is that [it supports successive claims](https://c2pa.org/specifications/specifications/1.3/specs/C2PA_Specification.html#_multiple_claims), allowing for building provenance trees. 

## Sharing is caring

> We’ve seen that, beyond sharing signatures with users directly, generative AI vendors could keep internal records of provenance information for the outputs they produce. A restricted version of this metadata could be sent to a _"hashes common"_, to which vendors would participate by sending the fingerprint and creation date of the contents they generated. This shared database would allow the public to check whether a given piece of content has been generated by a participating AI vendor, but also potentially help AI practitioners exclude AI-generated contents from training datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We’ve seen that, beyond sharing signatures with users directly, generative AI vendors could keep internal records of provenance information for the outputs they produce. A restricted version of this metadata could be sent to a _"hashes common"_, to which vendors would participate by sending the fingerprint and creation date of the contents they generated. This shared database would allow the public to check whether a given piece of content has been generated by a participating AI vendor, but also potentially help AI practitioners exclude AI-generated content from training datasets.
```

<a href="https://lil-blog-media.s3.amazonaws.com/f276b0c4-74.webp">
    <img src="https://lil-blog-media.s3.amazonaws.com/f276b0c4-07.webp" alt='Diagram: vizualizing a request to the "hashes common" to check if a piece of content is AI-generated.'/>
</a>

This would not be exclusive to one particular type of content (text or images), but would be limited by the extent to which [fuzzy matching techniques](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Locality-sensitive_hashing) can make reliable associations between slightly altered content and original hashes. The _“hashes common”_ is a larger subject that deserves its own case study to explore issues like scalability, privacy, metadata, and hashing algorithms.

## The last word

> The technology may be here, or close to being here, and [there seems to be momentum in the industry](https://iptc.org/news/google-announces-use-of-iptc-metadata-for-generative-ai-images/) to adopt some of the techniques I briefly described in this post. This may partly be due to growing concerns around plagiarism and copyright infringement, or because the generative AI boom coincides with the 2024 presidential cycle election and fears that these technologies may augment the generation of false information in that context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The technology may be here, or close to being here, and [there seems to be momentum in the industry](https://iptc.org/news/google-announces-use-of-iptc-metadata-for-generative-ai-images/) to adopt some of the techniques I briefly described in this post. This may partly be due to growing concerns around plagiarism and copyright infringement, or because the generative AI boom, coinciding with the 2024 presidential election cycle, gives rise to fears that these technologies may augment the generation of false information in that context.
```

> In any case, I think we all know what I shouldn’t do: ask ChatGPT what it _“thinks”_ about it to close my argument. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In any case, I think we all know what I shouldn’t do: ask ChatGPT what it _“thinks”_ in order to close my argument. 
```
